Session Management (#323)
gobeyondidentity/developer-docs: docs/authentication/session-management-overview.mdx

---
title: Session Management overview
id: session-management-overview
description: ''
slug: /session-management-overview
keywords:
  - api token
  - access token
  - session management
pagination_next: null
pagination_prev: null
last_update:
  date: 08/08/2023
  author: William May
doc_type: overview
displayed_sidebar: mainSidebar
---

import MultiLanguageCodeBlock from '@site/src/components/CodeBlocks/MultiLanguageCodeBlock';
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

> ## What is Session Management

Reviewer: This might be useful to link to or get some information from https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Session_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html

Author: Thanks 👍

Session management is a crucial aspect of web application development. An authentication session is a period of user interaction with the application, typically starting with the user providing credentials and ending with logout or inactivity timeout. Effective session management ensures user data privacy, maintains session state, and provides a seamless user experience.

> The Beyond Identity session consists of something we call a `token`, specifically [access token](/docs/next/api-token-overview)s. An access token, also called an API token, is an object or file that enables access to an application or resource. The token is a JWT, which is digitally signed and contains information about what resources can be accessed and for how long.
> 

Reviewer: Do we offer short lived and long lived session tokens?

```suggestion
The Beyond Identity session consists of a `token`, specifically an [access token](/docs/next/api-token-overview), which is implemented as a JSON Web Token (JWT). An access token, also used for API authenitcation, enables access to an application or resource. The token is digitally signed and contains information about what resources can be accessed and for how long.
```

Author: Reading [Corbado](https://docs.corbado.com/sessions/overview)'s documentation, I believe we only support short-term sessions.

> When you request an [access token](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.4), it is possible to receive an additional token called a [refresh token](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.5) in the response. The refresh token can be used to request additional access tokens with identical or narrower scope.

Author: By default, access tokens have a duration of 24 hours and refresh tokens are disabled. If refresh tokens are enabled, then you get both tokens on authentication.

## How to add session management to my application

There are a few functions of tokens that you should be aware of.

- [Create a Token](/docs/next/create-api-token) (Pre-Requisite)

> - [Store Tokens](#how-to-store-tokens)

Reviewer 2: Perhaps add "Create cookie" or "Create session cookie" with a link to that section below

Author: Added the link. Confirming, does this go to "Where to store tokens"?

Reviewer 2: I suggest that it link to a section specific to cookies such as Session Cookie Strategy, though i see that you mention storing tokens in cookies within the Where to store tokens section. I'm a little confused right now as to whether we are recommending that the reader store access and refresh tokens "in HTTP-only cookies" or store them server side with a session id in the cookie, or a combination. Sorry maybe it's me. Can you clarify the role of cookies relative to the tokens?

Author: I think in either case we are recommending that the reader use session cookies, but they can use them either to
- Store the tokens on the client
- Store an identifier on the client, which represents the tokens that are stored on the server

I have probably been referencing too many documents and resources on the subject. @tomsik68, do you know if we have a Beyond Identity recommended approach?

I wonder if it would make more sense to swap the Session Cookie Strategy and the Where to Store Tokens sections.

Reviewer 3: > I think in either case we are recommending that the reader use session cookies

I agree with this. There's not too many options in terms of how to persist the session on browser side. 

> do you know if we have a Beyond Identity recommended approach?

As far as I'm aware, there's no BI-recommended approach on how to store tokens.

Author: I was thinking about this, and I think the distinction really comes down to whether the application wants to handle session management on the client or the server. If on the client, then session cookies store tokens. If on the server, then session cookies store ids. Does that make more sense? Any recommendations on how to convey that better?

- [Introspect a Token](/docs/next/validate-access-tokens)
- [Revoke a Token](/docs/next/revoke-access-tokens)
- [Retrieve Active Tokens](/docs/next/list-access-tokens)

## How to store tokens

Applications may utilize cookies, local storage or other strategies to associate session with the end-user’s application. Beyond Identity doesn’t provide an API/SDK for this purpose; it is up to you to decide how to handle the end-user’s session. One option is to store the JWT received from Beyond Identity in the end user’s application. Another solution is to store the JWT received from Beyond Identity on the server and use a cookie. This is a common solution offered by many web frameworks and is more secure as the JWT is more sensitive.

### JWT Strategy with Refresh/Access Tokens

> In the context of session management, the central element is the JSON Web Token (JWT), which serves as the token that encapsulates and conveys the authentication and authorization information necessary for maintaining secure user sessions.

Reviewer: Do you know what claims are stored in the JWT for session tokens?

Author: I couldn't find good documentation on the claims. There are two examples (one [with](https://developer-docs-git-sessionmanagement-beyondidentity.vercel.app/docs/next/create-api-token#example-create-a-token-with-custom-claims) custom claims and one [without](https://developer-docs-git-sessionmanagement-beyondidentity.vercel.app/docs/next/create-api-token#example-create-a-token-with-a-limited-expiration-time)) in Create an access token, but I don't know what each claim means

Reviewer: maybe @tomsik68 knows which claims we currently support. Might be nice to list those

#### Access Tokens:

- Access tokens play a pivotal role in this strategy. These tokens are short-lived JWTs issued upon successful user authentication.

- They contain crucial user details and permissions in the form of claims.

- When a user interacts with the application, they present the access token in their requests. The server validates the access token to ascertain the user's identity and determine the extent of their authorized actions within the application.

> #### Refresh Tokens:

Reviewer: It might be nice to have a section about how to revoke a user

Author: I have a link to [Revoke a Token](https://developer-docs-git-sessionmanagement-beyondidentity.vercel.app/docs/next/revoke-access-tokens). Should we add an example to that page?

- Refresh tokens complement access tokens within the JWT strategy. These tokens are designed to have a longer lifespan compared to access tokens.

- Their primary purpose is to securely facilitate the renewal of access tokens without necessitating frequent user logins.

- In cases where an access token expires, the client can utilize the refresh token to request a new access token without needing the user's credentials again.

- It's important to emphasize that refresh tokens should be stored and handled with great care, as their exposure could lead to unauthorized access. They should not be accessible by client-side scripts or prone to XSS attacks.

> #### Why/Why Not to Use Local Storage with JWTs:

Reviewer 2: I'd rephrase the heading "Where to store tokens" as we seem to have a clear recommendation that local storage is not recommended, so "why/why not" is misleadingly neutral

Author: Done 👍

> #### Why/Why Not to Use Local Storage with JWTs:

Author: I expanded this section, which hopefully accomplishes this

- The JWT, as the token, should not be stored in local storage due to potential security vulnerabilities.

- Local storage is susceptible to Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) attacks, which could lead to the theft of tokens by malicious scripts.

- Furthermore, tokens residing in local storage tend to have a more extended lifespan, increasing the risk window for potential attacks.

> - To mitigate these risks, it is recommended to use HTTP-only cookies combined with the Secure flag, enhancing security and safeguarding against XSS attacks.

Reviewer 2: please add "store the JWT received from Beyond Identity on the server and use" the HTTP-only cookie...

Author: Done 👍

### Session Cookie Strategy

This strategy uses cookies to manage user sessions.

#### Session Initialization:

> - Upon login, the server generates a unique session identifier (session ID) and stores session data on the server.

Reviewer 2: what exactly is stored on the server? the access_token and refresh_token I'm guessing? are they indexed with the session id? should they be stored in memory or persisted?

Author: Yes, the tokens. I added more information, so hopefully this is clearer

#### Setting the Cookie:

- The server sends a session cookie to the client containing the session ID.

- The client's web browser stores this cookie locally.

#### Sending the Cookie:

- The client automatically includes the session cookie in each subsequent request.

#### Server-Side Session Data:

> - The server associates incoming requests with the appropriate session data using the session ID.

Reviewer 2: what are the incoming requests in this case? any request from the same user? what are the cases in which the session data on the server should be updated?

Author: Yes, any request from the same user. I added more information, so hopefully this is clearer

#### Expiry and Timeout:

> - Session cookies can have an expiration time and a timeout mechanism to handle inactivity.

Reviewer 2: should a token revocation be initiated on signout?

Author: I thought about this as well, so I added a small section. The session cookie should be removed and the tokens should be revoked, for more security

---
title: Session Management overview
id: session-management-overview
description: 'An overview of session management and how to handle it within your application'
slug: /session-management-overview
keywords:
  - api token
  - access token
  - session management
pagination_next: null
pagination_prev: null
last_update:
  date: 08/08/2023
  author: William May
doc_type: overview
displayed_sidebar: mainSidebar
---

import MultiLanguageCodeBlock from '@site/src/components/CodeBlocks/MultiLanguageCodeBlock';
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

## What is Session Management

Session management is a crucial aspect of web application development. An authentication session is a period of user interaction with the application, typically starting with the user providing credentials and ending with logout or inactivity timeout. Effective session management ensures user data privacy, maintains session state, and provides a seamless user experience.

> The Beyond Identity session consists of a `token`, specifically an [access token](/docs/next/api-token-overview), which is implemented as a JSON Web Token (JWT). An access token, also used for API authenitcation, enables access to an application or resource. The token is digitally signed and contains information about what resources can be accessed and for how long.

Reviewer 2: typo: authenitcation -> authentication

By default, a token expires after 24 hours, but this can be configured in the [Admin Console](/docs/next/session-management-console).

Additionally, when you request an [access token](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.4), it is possible to receive an additional token called a [refresh token](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.5) in the response. The refresh token can be used to request additional access tokens with identical or narrower scope.

## How to add session management to my application

> There are a few functions of tokens that you should be aware of.

Reviewer 2: I'd say "there are a few functions of sessions..." rather than tokens

- [Create a Token](/docs/next/create-api-token) (Pre-Requisite)
- [Store Tokens](#how-to-store-tokens)
- [Create Session Cookie](#where-to-store-tokens)
- [Introspect a Token](/docs/next/validate-access-tokens)
- [Revoke a Token](/docs/next/revoke-access-tokens)
- [Retrieve Active Tokens](/docs/next/list-access-tokens)

If you have enabled refresh tokens for your application, you can also refresh the access token to extend the duration of the user's session without requiring authentication.

- [Refresh token request](/docs/next/enable-refresh-tokens)

## How to store tokens

> Applications may utilize cookies, local storage or other strategies to associate session with the end-user’s application. Beyond Identity doesn’t provide an API/SDK for this purpose; it is up to you to decide how to handle the end-user’s session. One option is to store the JWT received from Beyond Identity in the end user’s application. Another solution is to store the JWT received from Beyond Identity on the server and use a cookie. This is a common solution offered by many web frameworks and is more secure as the JWT is more sensitive.

Reviewer: Did you have other web frameworks you could link the user to here? Or provide some guidance on libraries they can use?

Author: That is a good question. I did some research yesterday, and I mostly found references to built-in framework solutions ([OWASP](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Session_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html#built-in-session-management-implementations) names a few) or competitor solutions. I can add something though

### JWT Strategy with Refresh/Access Tokens

> The JWT (JSON Web Token) strategy with access/refresh tokens is a popular authentication and authorization mechanism used in web applications and APIs. It combines the benefits of JWTs with a token-based approach to manage user sessions securely. The strategy involves using two types of tokens: access tokens and refresh tokens.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: "The JWT (JSON Web Token) strategy with access/refresh tokens is a popular authentication and authorization mechanism used in web applications and APIs. It combines the benefits of short-lived access tokens with relatively long-lived refresh tokens to balance access control with user experience."

- It is short-lived and typically has a relatively short expiration time, usually just a few minutes or hours.

- The access token is issued to a user after they successfully authenticate (e.g., login) and is used to grant access to protected resources or perform authorized actions on the server.

- The server verifies the access token's authenticity and expiration to validate the user's identity and access privileges.

**Refresh Token:**

- A refresh token is also a JWT, but it is long-lived compared to the access token, often lasting days or even weeks.

- The refresh token's purpose is to obtain a new access token once the previous one expires without requiring the user to log in again.

- When the access token expires, the client can make a secure request to the server with the refresh token to obtain a new access token.

- This helps improve user experience by allowing them to stay authenticated without frequent logins while also mitigating some security risks associated with long-lived tokens.

The general flow of JWT strategy with access/refresh tokens works as follows:

> 1. **Authentication:** When a user logs in with valid credentials, the server issues both an access token and a refresh token.

Reviewer: because you have to configure this, right?
```suggestion
1. **Authentication:** When a user logs in with valid credentials, the server issues either an access token or an access token and a refresh token.
```

> 1. **Accessing Protected Resources:** The client includes the access token in the request headers whenever accessing protected resources on the server.

Reviewer: Here might be a good place to note and link to that section about supporting custom claims. Because they might want to check that when protecting a particular resource. 
https://developer-docs-git-sessionmanagement-beyondidentity.vercel.app/docs/next/create-api-token#example-create-a-token-with-custom-claims

> 1. **Access Token Expiry:** The access token has a short lifespan, and once it expires, the client needs to use the refresh token to get a new access token.
> 
> 1. **Refreshing Access Token:** The client sends the refresh token securely to the server to request a new access token.

Reviewer: what do they do in the case where there was no refresh token provided?

```suggestion
1. **Access Token Expiry:** The access token has a short lifespan, and once it expires, the client needs to use the refresh token to get a new access token.

1. **Refreshing Access Token:** The client sends the refresh token securely to the server to request a new access token.
```

Author: Was the suggested change a mistake? I see no difference.

I think they simply need to have the user authenticate again, the same as if a refresh token [expires](https://developer-docs-git-sessionmanagement-beyondidentity.vercel.app/docs/next/session-management-console#refresh-token-configuration-absolute-duration)
